Concepts overhaul: consolidate basic concepts into 2 page overview, ideas and theory (#1457)
ipfs/ipfs-docs: docs/concepts/how-ipfs-works.md

# How IPFS works

 In this conceptual guide, you'll learn about the major subsystems that <VueCustomTooltip label="InterPlanetary File System"  abbreviation is-small>IPFS</VueCustomTooltip> is comprised of, and how they work. The three key responsibilities of the IPFS subsystems are: 
- **Representing and addressing data**
- **Routing data**
- **Transferring data**

While these are the key responsibilities, IPFS's functionality spans beyond these three. 

Data in IPFS is addressed by its contents (<VueCustomTooltip label="A way to address data by its hash rather than its location (IPs)." underlined multiline>content addressing</VueCustomTooltip>), rather than a location, such as an IP address (location addressing).

:::callout
This guide is part 2 of a 3-part introduction to [the basic concepts of IPFS](../concepts/README.md#learn-the-basics). The first part, [What IPFS is and isn't](../concepts/what-is-ipfs.md), defines IPFS, while the second part, [**IPFS and the problems it solves**](../concepts/ipfs-solves.md), covers the problems with the internet and current protocols like HTTP that IPFS solves.
:::

> ## Subsystems overview

Author: For this one, I added a blurb to each section https://bafybeiaj2r7v6coj5jryzqrxvcastvupsccshs64ajxwdetcdjks5ss6a4.on.fleek.co/concepts/how-ipfs-works/#kademlia-distributed-hash-table-dht and https://bafybeiaj2r7v6coj5jryzqrxvcastvupsccshs64ajxwdetcdjks5ss6a4.on.fleek.co/concepts/how-ipfs-works/#how-content-routing-works-in-ipfs, with a link to the libp2p page + a tooltip definition

1. Given a peer ID, a node broadcasts a query message to multiple peers in the network, asking that the peer having the given peer ID to identify itself.
2. The peer with the given peer ID then broadcasts a message with its IP address to other peers on the network, which can then use that information to update their own mDNS records.

The use of mDNS in IPFS has several benefits that make it a clear choice for peer discovery over traditional DNS:

- Nodes can broadcast messages requesting and reporting address information to multiple peers, increasing speed and efficiency of peer discovery.
- Nodes do not rely on a centralized name server to discover other peers, improving network resilience, decentralization and censorship resistance.

### Delegated routing over HTTP

> Delegated content routing is a mechanism for IPFS implementations to use for offloading content routing to another process/server using an HTTP API. For example, if an IPFS node does not implement the DHT, a delegated router can search the DHT for peers on its behalf. The main benefit of delegated routing is that nodes are not required to implement routing functionality themselves if they do not have the computing resources to do so, or wish to build an IPFS system with a custom backend for routing. Thus, delegated routing over HTTPS provides IPFS nodes with a standard interface that allows more flexibility in terms of how content routing works. 

Reviewer: Link to the spec here: https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/main/routing/DELEGATED_CONTENT_ROUTING_HTTP.md

:::callout
**Learn more**

Want learn more about Bitswap? See the [Bitswap deep dive](../concepts/bitswap.md).
:::

### IPFS HTTP Gateways

HTTP Gateways allow applications that do not support or implement all IPFS subsystems to fetch data from the IPFS network using an HTTP interface. In its simplest form, a gateway is an IPFS Node that also exposes an [HTTP Gateway API](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/main/http-gateways/README.md).

:::callout
**Learn more**

Want learn more about IPFS Gateways? See the [IPFS Gateway conceptual guide](../concepts/ipfs-gateway.md).
:::

> ### Sneakernet

Reviewer: This section is unnecessarily long and goes too much into the reasons **why** you would use sneakernet. 

The main idea to get across here is that you can move CAR files using external drives without any network connectivity and still get the benefits of IPFS.

:::callout
This guide is part 2 of a 2-part introduction to [the basic concepts of IPFS](../concepts/README.md#learn-the-basics). The first part, [IPFS and the problems it solves](../concepts/what-is-ipfs.md) defines what IPFS is and isn't, and problems it addresses. 
:::

In this conceptual guide, you'll learn about the different subsystems that IPFS is comprised of, and how they work.

## How IPFS represents data

IPFS represents data as content-addressed <VueCustomTooltip label="The term for a single unit of data in IPFS." underlined multiline is-medium>blocks</VueCustomTooltip>, and operates on those data blocks using the following subsystems:

- [Content IDentifier (CID)](#content-identifier-cid)
- [InterPlanetary Linked Data (IPLD)](#interplanetary-linked-data-ipld)

> - [Content Addressable aRchive (CAR) files](#content-addressable-archive-car-files)

Author: Gotcha. I was basing the general structure here off of the susbsystems listed in Representing and Addressing in https://ecosystem-wg.notion.site/What-is-IPFS-Definitions-02d37b91f6824bba8c246fdcd5021a5c. I'll table updates for this until we discuss further

### Content IDentifier (CID)

In IPFS, data is chunked into <VueCustomTooltip label="The term for a single unit of data in IPFS." underlined multiline is-medium>blocks</VueCustomTooltip>, which are assigned a unique identifier called a <VueCustomTooltip label="An address used to point to data in IPFS, based on the content itself, as opposed to the location." underlined multiline is-medium>Content IDentifier (CID)</VueCustomTooltip>. In general, the CID is generated for each block by:

1. Computing a cryptographic hash of the block's data.

> 1. Combining that hash with other information about the block using the following <VueCustomTooltip label="A collection of interoperable, extensible protocols for making data self-describable." underlined multiline is-medium>multiformats</VueCustomTooltip>. 

Author: Got it. Moved the anatomy discussion to the content-addressing page since thats the deeper dive

1. Requesting nodes broadcast a <VueCustomTooltip label="A list of the CIDs of data blocks that an IPFS node wants to receive from peers in the network." underlined>wantlist</VueCustomTooltip> message to peers in the network.
1. Peers receiving the wantlist eventually process and respond to the requester with one of the following:
   - A _have_ message, indicating the peer has a CID requested.
   - A _don't-have_ message, indicating the peer DOES NOT have a requested CID.
1. The requester sends a _want-block_ message to peers that responded with a _have_ message, which requests that the peer send the block of data specified by the requesters wantlist.
1. Peers send the block to the requester.
1. As soon as the requesting node receives the wanted block, it broadcasts a message to peers that it no longer needs the requested block.

:::callout
Peers also store wantlists, so that if a peer receives requested blocks at a later time, it can then send them to the node that originally requested the data blocks. 
:::

> ### mDNS

Reviewer: I wouldn't get into all the details of mDNS, we can link out or move it to another docs page.

The key thing to get across is how mDNS works in IPFS, and as far as I understand, it's to discover other peers in the local network.

1. Given a peer ID, a node broadcasts a query message to multiple peers in the network, asking that the peer having the given peer ID to identify itself.
2. The peer with the given peer ID then broadcasts a message with its IP address to other peers on the network, which can then use that information to update their own mDNS records.

The use of mDNS in IPFS has several benefits that make it a clear choice for peer discovery over traditional DNS:

- Nodes can broadcast messages requesting and reporting address information to multiple peers, increasing speed and efficiency of peer discovery.
- Nodes do not rely on a centralized name server to discover other peers, improving network resilience, decentralization and censorship resistance.

### Delegated routing over HTTP

> Because IPFS is an open-source protocol with multiple implementations, an IPFS node is not required to implement full routing functionality itself. Instead, an IPFS node can request that a <VueCustomTooltip label="An IPFS node that perform tasks on behalf of network peers using the IPFS HTTP API." underlined multiline is-medium>delegated router</VueCustomTooltip> perform a routing task for it. For example, if an IPFS node does not implement the DHT, a delegated router can search the DHT for peers on its behalf. The main benefit of delegated routing is that nodes are not required to implement routing functionality themselves if they do not wish to, or do not have the computing resources to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delegated content routing is a mechanism for IPFS implementations to use for offloading content routing to another process/server using an HTTP API. For example, if an IPFS node does not implement the DHT, a delegated router can search the DHT for peers on its behalf. The main benefit of delegated routing is that nodes are not required to implement routing functionality themselves if they do not wish to, or do not have the computing resources to do so.
```

I think the opening sentence here misses the point. "Full routing functionality" for IPFS has never really been defined, so I would avoid referencing it here. 

Another thing to note about delegating routing is that it's not just a way to delegate DHT work, as is the case of the network indexer. It's a standard interface that allows more flexibility in terms of how content routing works. It can be used for example, for private data sets or to build an IPFS system that doesn't use the DHT and instead has a custom backend that uses Redis and exposes a delegated routing endpoint.

> ## How IPFS transfers data

Reviewer: The first one to list here is Bitswap for data transfer. 

I would also remove GraphSync from here, as almost none of the IPFS implementations support it.

In addition to [routing data](#how-ipfs-routes-data), nodes in the IPFS network must efficiently distribute and deliver the content addressed data, taking into account that there are some nodes in the network who already have a copy of the data, and other nodes who do not have a copy of the data, but want one. To handle the transfer of data, IPFS uses the following subsystems:

- [IPFS HTTP Gateways](#ipfs-http-gateways)
- [GraphSync](#graphsync)
- [Sneakernet](#sneakernet)

### IPFS HTTP Gateways

> HTTP Gateways allow applications that do not support or implement the IPFS protocol to interact with nodes on the IPFS network. There are multiple types of HTTP gateways, each optimized for specific tasks, and other factors like security and performance. Examples include:

Reviewer: This categorisation of gateways isn't useful, e.g. writeable gateways aren't a thing and ones that require auth aren't key to understanding how IPFS works.

```suggestion
HTTP Gateways allow applications that do not support or implement all IPFS subsystems to fetch data from the IPFS network using an HTTP interface. In its simplest form, a gateway is an IPFS Node that also exposes an [HTTP Gateway API](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/main/http-gateways/README.md)"
```

- _<VueCustomTooltip label="An IPFS HTTP Gateway that can fetch data from the IPFS network using the HTTP GET method." underlined multiline is-small is-right>Read-only</VueCustomTooltip>_
- _<VueCustomTooltip label="An IPFS HTTP Gateway that can write data to the IPFS network using the HTTP POST, PUT and DELETE methods." underlined multiline is-small is-right>Writeable</VueCustomTooltip>_
- _<VueCustomTooltip label="An IPFS HTTP Gateway that can limit access to and from data on the IPFS network by acting as a reverse proxy." underlined multiline is-small is-right>Authentication</VueCustomTooltip>_

> Additionally, there are multiple types of gateway providers:

Reviewer: I don't think this section on gateway providers is necessary.

- _<VueCustomTooltip label="An IPFS HTTP Gateway hosted as a local service i.e. at localhost:8080 on your local machine." underlined multiline is-small is-right>Local gateway</VueCustomTooltip>_
- _<VueCustomTooltip label="An IPFS HTTP Gateway hosted within a private network that handles access to the IPFS network for multiple computers within the private network, and may be configured to limit access to requests from specific domains." underlined multiline is-small is-right>Private gateway</VueCustomTooltip>_
- _<VueCustomTooltip label="An IPFS HTTP Gateway hosted and operated by a third-party, such as Protocol Labs." underlined multiline is-small is-right>Public gateway</VueCustomTooltip>_

> ### GraphSync

Reviewer: As mentioned above, I would remove Garphsync as it isn't broadly implemented in IPFS

### Kademlia Distributed Hash Table (DHT)

IPFS uses Kademlia, a <VueCustomTooltip label="A decentralized data store that maps data based on key-value pairs." underlined multiline is-left>Distributed Hash Table (DHT)</VueCustomTooltip> designed for decentralized peer-to-peer computer networks. Kademlia is used to map what the user is looking for to the peer that is storing the matching content. The Kademlia DHT can be thought of as a large table distributed across many nodes that stores information on who has what data, and where that data might be located. The Kademlia DHT provides IPFS with:

> - A catalog and a navigation system for data on the IPFS network

Reviewer: The main thing that the Kademlia DHT provides is a way to store key/val records without a central server. The brilliance is how the XOR "distance" metric (where distance is peer ID XOR record key )is used to create a self-organising system with pretty efficient lookups (log n).

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Y6vLTzM7zA
https://kelseyc18.github.io/kademlia_vis/basics/1/

### Delegated routing over HTTP

> Delegated content routing is a mechanism for IPFS implementations to use for offloading content routing to another process/server using an HTTP API. For example, if an IPFS node does not implement the DHT, a delegated router can search the DHT for peers on its behalf. The main benefit of delegated routing is that nodes are not required to implement routing functionality themselves if they do not wish to, or do not have the computing resources to do so.

Reviewer: This is great!
